In this lecture, you'll learn about why we need to have IPv6. You already know the main reason
from earlier lectures, which is that we're running out of global IPv4 addresses.
But you saw in the last lecture that we can use NAT, Network Address Translation, as a workaround.
So why can't we just use NAT permanently?
Well, the problem is that there are some issues with NAT. The main one being that it breaks the standard
end-to-end IP model, the way the IP normally works.
And that can cause issues with security and it can also break some applications.
To give you an example, looking at the diagram here, we've got Company A and we've got Company B. And
they've both got IP phones internally and they do a lot of business with each other.
So they would like to be able to make phone calls to each other over their IP network rather than doing
it through the normal phone company because that will save them money.
So Company A has got their CUCM. That's a Cisco
Unified Communications Manager that controls the phones.
I'll just call it the Call Manager for short and Company B has got their Call Manager as well.
And what company A and Company B can do is they can program their Call Managers to point to each other.
So that calls between the two companies can go over the IP network.
But when they're using NAT, there is going to be a problem with this.
And this is very common with multimedia applications like voice and video.
And NAT is typically going to stop the traffic.
It's going to break it.
So let's walk through what's going to happen so you can see the issue here.
So I've got an IP phone at Company A. It's extension 10-1001.
It's using a private IP address of 10.0.0.10.
And if that IP phone send traffic out to the Internet, let's say that it would use Dynamic NAT and for this example,
it's going to get NAT'd to 203.0.113.10. So the IP phones,
they're not intelligent enough to make their own decisions.
They need to ask the Call Manager for help with that. So the user at extension 10-1001
at Company A, he wants to call the user at extension 11-2001 at Company B. So he picks up his handset
and he dials 11-2001. That sends signalling message to the Call Manager saying, "Hey,
I'd like to call 11-2001 please."
It comes from the private IP address 10.0.0.10 and it goes to the Call Manager's private
IP address of 10.0.0.100.
So that all works just fine.
Everything's internal in Company A right now.
The Call Manager at Company A then look at its dial plan which was configured by the administrator,
and it sees that whenever there's a call for anything starting with 11 and then four additional
digits, to send that call to the Company B Call Manager, which is available with the public IP address
of 203.0.113.20.
So the Call Manager sends signaling to Company B's Call Manager saying, "Hey, there's a
call for 11-2001 and it's coming from the phone at 10.0.0.10.
That traffic comes from the Call Manager's IP address of 10.0.0.100.
And it goes to Company B's Call Manager at 203.0.113.20.
The traffic will reach Router A and Router A will NAT the source address of Company A's Call Manager to
10.0.0.100 to the public IP address 203.0.113.3.
Because on Router A we've configured a Static NAT rule for that. The traffic will then get to Router B over at
Company B and it will NAT the destination address of 203.0.113.20 to
the internal private IP address of 10.0.10.100 because Company B Router B also has a Static
NAT rule for Company B's Call Manager.
So the signal comes in to the Call Manager at Company B and it knows the extension 11-2001 is available
at IP address 10.0.10.10.
And so it sends a signalling message down to the IP phone saying, "Hey, there's a call coming in
for you. Please ring." Then the user at extension 11-2001,
here's their phone ringing. So they pick up the handset.
The phone will then send a signal back to the Company
B Call Manager saying, "Hey, the user has picked up and we're ready for the call now."
The company B Call Manager then need to send a signal back to the Company A Call Manager saying, "Hey,
extension 11-2001 is ready for the call and its IP address 10.0.10.10." That
goes from 10.0.10.100 at Call Manager B to 203.0.113.3,
the public IP address of Call Manager A.
Router B sends the traffic out and it will NAT the source address of 10.0.10.100,
the Company B Call Manager, to 203.0.113.20. It will then get to Router A and it will
NAT the destination address 203.0.113.3 to 10.0.0.100.
So all the traffic is working just fine now and NAT is allowing us to have private IP addresses on
the inside and those fixed static public addresses on the outside
for our Call Managers. Call Manager A then sends that signalling message to phone A saying, "OK, the phone is
ready to stream your voice directly to 10.0.10.10, which is the IP address of the phone at Company B.
And Call Manager B tells phone B to stream your voice to 10.0.0.10, which is the IP address of the
phone at Company A.
But the problem is that the phones only have connectivity to each other on their NAT'd public IP addresses,
not via the internal private addresses. Phone A at 10.0.0.10 does not have connectivity to 10.0.10.10
over at company B.
Those are two different private IP addresses that only work internally at Company A and internally at
Company B. They don't work between the two different companies.
So for the two phones to be able to communicate with each other, they have to be using a public IP address,
which would be NAT'd on both sides. But because the information was included in the higher level
traffic within our voice protocols, the phones don't know to use a public IP address.
They're told to use that private IP address.
There's no connectivity, so the call fails. It doesn't work.
Now, there can be workarounds for this. Devices such as application layer firewalls, which can look up that
higher layer traffic, see what's going on in there and make adjustments.
Also, traversal servers and proxy servers can help with these issues. But NAT does break the way that
IP works normally.
And it does break applications that use embedded IP addresses or port numbers in the higher OSI layers.
So it would be a cleaner solution if IP supported an addressing scheme which was big enough to give
all devices in the world a publicly reachable address.
That way the phones inside the two companies would have a publicly reachable address to get to each
other and the call would work.
So how can we do that?
Well, we've got IPv6.
It uses a 128-bit address compared to IPv4's 32-bit address. And it provides way, way, way
more addresses than IPv4 does.
The address is 4x longer, but it's much more than 4x as many addresses,
7.9x10 to the power of 28. A very big number.
There are other IPv6 enhancements as well.
So in addition to the larger address space, IPv6 was designed to support building security and also
host mobility, where a host can keep the same IP address but move to different physical locations.
OK, last to tell you here is that wherever you're going to use IPv6, IPv6 and IPv4, it's
not an either/or decision.
You don't have to use IPv4 or IPv6, you can use IPv4 and IPv6. In a dual stack implementation,
a network interface on a host or on a router can have both an IPv4 and an IPv6 address at the same
time.
It can then communicate using either protocol.
So if the application sends traffic to an IPv4 destination address, it will use IPv4. If the application
sends traffic to an IPv6 destination address, it will use IPv6. Dual stack can be enabled long term.
If you do need to support both IPv4 and IPv6 applications or it can be used shorter term if you're
using it as an IPv4 to IPv6 transition strategy.
OK, those are the limitations of NAT and how IPv6 doesn't suffer from them. In the next lecture will
start getting into more details about how IPv6 works.